Toxoplasma Gondii 

= Protozoa
i(unicellular eukaryotic organism).
Coined in 1818 by Gorg August Goldfuss "primitive animals"
Original idea was single cellular organizms with animal like behavior,
like predation and motility.

Plant vs animal division is messier than originally thought.

Ingest food in vacuoles.

= Lifecycle

Alternate between proliferative stages (trophozoites) and dormant
cycts. As cycst, can survive outside of host and don't need nutrients.
As trophozoites, they actively feed.

Asexual reproduction - binary fission or multiple fission. Can exchange
genetic information sexuallly, e.g. through conjugation, but is decoupled
from reproduction.

Obligate intracellular - can't reproduce outside host cell

1. Tachyzoites - motile, quickly multiplying. Convert from bradyzoites or
sporozoites in intestinal ephithelium of host. Spread throughout the body
via the blood stream, then convert to bradyzoites to form tissue cysts.
Infect cell, form vacuoles, reproduce until host burts.

2. Merozoites - in cat intestine, like Tahyzoites but for sexual reproduction.
Comes from bradyzoites consumed by cat. After multiplying, transform
into noninfectious sexual sage, eventually form zygote-containing oocysts.

3. Bradyzoites - slowly dividing stage in tissue cysts. Can be anywhere, but
primarily in brain, eyes and striated muscle (e.g. heart). Especially
brain for mice. Caused by pressure from host immune system.

4. Sporozoites - inside oocysts, convert to tachyzoites when consumed.

Epithilium - one of four types, avascular, line cavaties and surfaces


Can infect all warm-blooded animals, but can only sexually reproduce in
felids (e.g. domestic cats).

Latent infection up to half the world, 23% in US. Statistical correlation
with other pathalogies, but no one has proved causation. Examples: OCD,
Traffic Accidents, Schizophrenia.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3963851/
Flegr J, Prandota J, Sovičková M, Israili ZH. Toxoplasmosis – A Global Threat. Correlation of Latent Toxoplasmosis with Specific Disease Burden in a Set of 88 Countries. Fernandez-Reyes D, ed. PLoS ONE. 2014;9(3):e90203. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0090203.


Alters rodent behavior to increase the chance they will be preyed upon by cats.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2526137/

Webster JP. The Effect of Toxoplasma gondii on Animal Behavior: Playing Cat and Mouse. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 2007;33(3):752-756. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbl073.

Lack of fear of cat odors (esp. cat pee). Actually showed preference for
cat scented areas!!! Less neophobic, more active.

Parasites as causative agents of human affective disorders? The impact of anti-psychotic, mood-stabilizer and anti-parasite medication on Toxoplasma gondii's ability to alter host behaviour
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1560245/
Webster J., Lamberton PH., Donnelly C., Torrey E. Parasites as causative agents of human affective disorders? The impact of anti-psychotic, mood-stabilizer and anti-parasite medication on Toxoplasma gondii’s ability to alter host behaviour. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2006;273(1589):1023-1030. doi:10.1098/rspb.2005.3413.

Used Haloperidol anti-psychotic on infected rats. In vitro tests show it
inhibits T. gondii replication and invasion of brain cells.


= Toxo1 locus of control

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16407112/
Cavaillès P, Sergent V, Bisanz C, et al. The rat Toxo1 locus directs toxoplasmosis outcome and controls parasite proliferation and spreading by macrophage-dependent mechanisms. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. 2006;103(3):744-749. doi:10.1073/pnas.0506643103.

LEW rats - particular breed of lab rat, albino, inbred
Rats typically have sub-clinical like humans, but is severe in mice

Based on in vitro studies, macrophage can impede proliferation within vacuole
Bascially they infected macrophages from restistand and non-resistant
strains, and in reistant macrophages, most contained only one (after 20 hours
of incubation and the free prasites being washed). 90% inhibition compared with
BN. Same test using fibroblasts found no inhibition in LEW samples.

This doesn't explain total inhibition of spreading in LEW rats in vivo.
Started with inoculating tachyzoites, checking peritoneal fluid, most still
found in extracellular position, no difference in viability. Then taken out
of rats, in vitro invastion assay onto fibroblasts
(HFF - human foreskin fibroblasts). 98% inhbition of invasion rate
in LEW samples!!!

From day 2 to 5, no parasites detected.

Q: what about dendritic cells?

Usually resistance involves several polymorphic genes.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9597143

Resistance from single gene sometimes happens, e.g. CCR5 for HIV in humans.

7.6 megabase region, 86 identified putative rat genes. Several are likely
to be expressed in hematopoietic cells. No obvious candidate.

Other immunological related genes, Alox15 coding for lipoxygenases, in Toxo1,
is one candidate.

Forward genetics approach.


Rat picture: http://hilltoplabs.com/public/lewis.html

T. gondii: http://www.cdc.gov/dpdx/toxoplasmosis/gallery.html#cyst
lifecycle: http://www.cdc.gov/parasites/toxoplasmosis/biology.html
